Add appendix with example file decoding 'by hand' (#120)
ietf-wg-cellar/flac-specification: rfc_backmatter.md

0xce+4 | 4 bit  | 0b1001          | sample rate 44.1kHz
0xcf+0 | 4 bit  | 0b0001          | stereo, no decorrelation
0xcf+4 | 3 bit  | 0b100           | bit depth 16 bit
0xcf+7 | 1 bit  | 0b0             | mandatory 0 bit
0xd0+0 | 1 byte | 0x01            | frame number 1
0xd1+0 | 1 byte | 0x02            | blocksize 3
0xd2+0 | 1 byte | 0xa4            | frame header CRC

The first subframe starts at 0xd3+0 and is broken down in the following table.

Start  | Length | Contents        | Description
:------|:-------|:----------------|:-----------------
0xd3+0 | 1 bit  | 0b0             | mandatory 0 bit
0xd3+1 | 6 bit  | 0b000001        | verbatim subframe
0xd3+7 | 1 bit  | 0b0             | no wasted bits present
0xd4+0 | 16 bit | 0xc382          | 16-bit unencoded sample
0xd6+0 | 16 bit | 0xc40b          | 16-bit unencoded sample
0xd8+0 | 16 bit | 0xc14a          | 16-bit unencoded sample

The second subframe starts at 0xda+0 and is broken down in the following table

Start  | Length | Contents          | Description
:------|:-------|:------------------|:-----------------
0xda+0 | 1 bit  | 0b0               | mandatory 0 bit
0xda+1 | 6 bit  | 0b000001          | verbatim subframe

> 0xda+7 | 1 bit  | 0b0               | no wasted bits present

Author: ```suggestion
0xda+7 | 1 bit  | 0b1               | wasted bits present
```
Correct copy-paste error

{backmatter}

# Examples

> This appendix contains short example FLAC files and short parts of FLAC files which are decoded step by step. These examples provide a more engaging way to understand the FLAC format than the formal specification. The text explaining these examples assumes the reader has at least cursory read the specification and that the reader refers to the specification for explanation of the terminology used. These examples mostly focus on the lay-out of several metadata blocks and subframe types and the implications of certain aspects (for example wasted bits and stereo decorrelation) on this lay-out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This informational appendix contains short example FLAC files and short parts of FLAC files which are decoded step by step. These examples provide a more engaging way to understand the FLAC format than the formal specification. The text explaining these examples assumes the reader has at least cursory read the specification and that the reader refers to the specification for explanation of the terminology used. These examples mostly focus on the lay-out of several metadata blocks and subframe types and the implications of certain aspects (for example wasted bits and stereo decorrelation) on this lay-out.
```

0x04+1 | 7 bit  | 0b0000000       | Streaminfo metadata block
0x05+0 | 3 byte | 0x000022        | Length 34 byte

As the header indicates that this is the last metadata block, the position of the first audio frame can now be calculated as the position of the first byte after the metadata block header + the length of the block, i.e. 8+34 = 42 or 0x2a. As can be seen 0x2a indeed contains the frame sync code for fixed blocksize streams, 0xfff8.

The streaminfo metadata block contents are broken down in the following table

Start  | Length  | Contents           | Description
:------|:--------|:-------------------|:-----------------
0x08+0 | 2 byte  | 0x1000             | Min. blocksize 4096
0x0a+0 | 2 byte  | 0x1000             | Max. blocksize 4096
0x0c+0 | 3 byte  | 0x00000f           | Min. frame size 15 byte
0x0f+0 | 3 byte  | 0x00000f           | Max. frame size 15 byte
0x12+0 | 20 bit  | 0x0ac4, 0b0100     | Sample rate 44100 Hertz
0x14+4 | 3 bit   | 0b001              | 2 channels
0x14+7 | 5 bit   | 0b01111            | Sample bit depth 16
0x15+4 | 36 bit  | 0b0000, 0x00000001 | Total no. of samples 1
0x1a   | 16 byte | (...)              | MD5 signature

> The minimum and maximum blocksize are both 4096. This was apparently the blocksize the encoder was intending to use for this audio, but as only 1 interchannel sample was provided, no frames with size 4096 are actually present in this file. This is because even in fixed blocksize streams, the size of the last frame can be smaller.

Author: ```suggestion
The minimum and maximum blocksize are both 4096. This was apparently the blocksize the encoder planned to use, but as only 1 interchannel sample was provided, no frames with 4096 samples are actually present in this file.
```

As this is a verbatim subframe, the subframe only contains unencoded sample values. With a blocksize of 1, it contains only a single sample. The bit depth of the audio is 16 bit, but as the subframe header signals 2 wasted bits, only 14 bits are stored. As no stereo decorrelation is used, a bit depth increase for the side channel is not applicable. So, the next 14 bit (starting at position 0x32+2) contain the unencoded sample coded big-endian, signed two’s complement. The value reads 0b011000 11111101, or 6397. This value needs to be shifted left by 2 bits, to account for the wasted bits. The value is then 0b011000 11111101 00, or 25588.

The second subframe starts at 0x34, it is broken down in the following table.

Start  | Length | Contents        | Description
:------|:-------|:----------------|:-----------------
0x34+0 | 1 bit  | 0b0             | mandatory 0 bit
0x34+1 | 6 bit  | 0b000001        | verbatim subframe
0x34+7 | 1 bit  | 0b1             | wasted bits present
0x35+0 | 4 bit  | 0b0001          | 4 wasted bits

> 0x35+4 | 14 bit | 0b0010, 0x8b    | 12-bit unencoded sample

Author: ```suggestion
0x35+4 | 12 bit | 0b0010, 0x8b    | 12-bit unencoded sample
```

Reviewer 2: good catch!

### Vorbis comment

The vorbis comment metadata block contains the vendor string and a single comment. It is broken down in the following table.

Start  | Length  | Contents           | Description
:------|:--------|:-------------------|:-----------------
0x40+0 | 1 bit   | 0b0                | Not the last metadata block
0x40+1 | 7 bit   | 0b0000100          | Vorbis comment metadata block
0x41+0 | 3 byte  | 0x00003a           | Length 58 byte
0x44+0 | 4 byte  | 0x20000000         | Vendor string length 32 byte
0x48+0 | 32 byte | (...)              | Vendor string
0x68+0 | 4 byte  | 0x01000000         | Number of fields 1
0x6c+0 | 4 byte  | 0x0e000000         | Field length 14 byte
0x70+0 | 14 byte | (...)              | Field contents

The vendor string is reference libFLAC 1.3.3 20190804, the field contents of the only field is TITLE=שלום. The vorbis comment field is 14 bytes but only 10 characters in size, because it contains four 2-byte characters.

### Padding

The last metadata block is a (very short) padding block.

Start  | Length  | Contents           | Description
:------|:--------|:-------------------|:-----------------

> 0x7e+0 | 1 bit   | 0b0                | Last metadata block

Author: Another copy-paste error
```suggestion
0x7e+0 | 1 bit   | 0b1                | Last metadata block
```

0x37+5 | 2 bit  | 0b00            | Rice-coded residual, 4-bit parameter
0x37+7 | 4 bit  | 0b0010          | Partition order 2
0x38+3 | 4 bit  | 0b0011          | Rice parameter 3
0x38+7 | 1 bit  | 0b1             | Quotient 0
0x39+0 | 3 bit  | 0b110           | Remainder 6
0x39+3 | 1 bit  | 0b1             | Quotient 0
0x39+4 | 3 bit  | 0b001           | Remainder 1
0x39+7 | 4 bit  | 0b0001          | Quotient 3
0x3a+3 | 3 bit  | 0b001           | Remainder 1
0x3a+6 | 4 bit  | 0b1111          | No rice parameter, escape code
0x3b+2 | 5 bit  | 0b00101         | Partition encoded with 5 bits
0x3b+7 | 5 bit  | 0b10110         | Residual -10
0x3c+4 | 5 bit  | 0b11010         | Residual -6
0x3d+1 | 5 bit  | 0b00010         | Residual 2
0x3d+6 | 5 bit  | 0b01000         | Residual 8
0x3e+3 | 5 bit  | 0b01000         | Residual 8
0x3f+0 | 5 bit  | 0b00110         | Residual 6
0x3f+5 | 4 bit  | 0b0010          | Rice parameter 2
0x40+1 | 22 bit | (...)           | Residual partition 3
0x42+7 | 4 bit  | 0b0001          | Rice parameter 1
0x43+3 | 23 bit | (...)           | Residual partition 4

The frame ends with 6 padding bits and a 2 byte frame CRC

> To decode this subframe, 21 predictions have to calculated and added to their corresponding residuals. This is a sequential process: as each prediction uses previous samples, it is not possible to start this decoding halfway a subframe or decode a subframe with parallel threads.

Author: ```suggestion
To decode this subframe, 21 predictions have to be calculated and added to their corresponding residuals. This is a sequential process: as each prediction uses previous samples, it is not possible to start this decoding halfway a subframe or decode a subframe with parallel threads.
```

0x2c+4 | 4 bit  | 0b1001          | sample rate 44.1kHz
0x2d+0 | 4 bit  | 0b0001          | stereo, no decorrelation
0x2d+4 | 3 bit  | 0b100           | bit depth 16 bit
0x2d+7 | 1 bit  | 0b0             | mandatory 0 bit
0x2e+0 | 1 byte | 0x00            | frame number 0
0x2f+0 | 1 byte | 0x00            | blocksize 1
0x30+0 | 1 byte | 0xbf            | frame header CRC

As the stream is a fixed blocksize stream, the number at 0x2e contains a frame number. As the value is smaller than 128, only 1 byte is used for the encoding.

At byte 0x31 the subframe header of the first subframe starts, it is broken down in the following table.

Start  | Length | Contents        | Description
:------|:-------|:----------------|:-----------------
0x31+0 | 1 bit  | 0b0             | mandatory 0 bit
0x31+1 | 6 bit  | 0b000001        | verbatim subframe
0x31+7 | 1 bit  | 0b1             | wasted bits present
0x32+0 | 2 bit  | 0b01            | 2 wasted bits
0x32+2 | 14 bit | 0b011000, 0xfd  | 14-bit unencoded sample

As the wasted bits flag is 1 in this subframe, an unary coded number follows. Starting at 0x32, we see 0b01, which unary codes for 1, meaning we have 2 wasted bits in this subframe.

> As this is a verbatim subframe, the subframe only contains unencoded sample values. With a blocksize of 1, it contains only a single sample. The bit depth of the audio is 16 bit, but as the subframe header signals 2 wasted bits, only 14 bits are stored. As no stereo decorrelation is used, a bit depth increase for the side channel is not applicable. So, the next 14 bit (starting at position 0x32+2) contain the unencoded sample coded big-endian, signed two’s complement. The value reads 0b011000 11111101, or 6397. This value needs to be shifted left by 2 bits, to account for the wasted bits. The value is then 0b011000 11111101 00, or 25588.

Author: ```suggestion
As this is a verbatim subframe, the subframe only contains unencoded sample values. With a blocksize of 1, it contains only a single sample. The bit depth of the audio is 16 bit, but as the subframe header signals 2 wasted bits, only 14 bits are stored. As no stereo decorrelation is used, a bit depth increase for the side channel is not applicable. So, the next 14 bit (starting at position 0x32+2) contain the unencoded sample coded big-endian, signed two's complement. The value reads 0b011000 11111101, or 6397. This value needs to be shifted left by 2 bits, to account for the wasted bits. The value is then 0b011000 11111101 00, or 25588.
```

000000c0: 10110100 00000001 00001101 10011001  ....
000000c4: 11010010 11001101 00011010 01101000  ...h
000000c8: 11110001 11100110 10111000 00010000  ....
000000cc: 11111111 11111000 01101001 00011000  ..i.
000000d0: 00000001 00000010 10100100 00000010  ....
000000d4: 11000011 10000010 11000100 00001011  ....
000000d8: 11000001 01001010 00000011 11101110  .J..
000000dc: 01001000 11011101 00000011 10110110  H...
000000e0: 01111100 00010011 00110000           |.0
```

### Signature and streaminfo

Most of the streaminfo block is the same as in example 1, so only parts that are different are listed in the following table

Start  | Length  | Contents           | Description
:------|:--------|:-------------------|:-----------------
0x04+0 | 1 bit   | 0b0                | Not the last metadata block
0x08+0 | 2 byte  | 0x0010             | Min. blocksize 16
0x0a+0 | 2 byte  | 0x0010             | Max. blocksize 16
0x0c+0 | 3 byte  | 0x000017           | Min. frame size 23 byte
0x0f+0 | 3 byte  | 0x000044           | Max. frame size 68 byte
0x15+4 | 36 bit  | 0b0000, 0x00000013 | Total no. of samples 19
0x1a   | 16 byte | (...)              | MD5 signature

> This time, the minimum and maximum blocksizes are reflected in the file: there is one block of 16 samples, but the last block (which has 3 samples) is excluded from this number. The MD5 signature is d5b0564975e98b8d8b930422757b8103, this will be verified at the end of this example.

Author: ```suggestion
This time, the minimum and maximum blocksizes are reflected in the file: there is one block of 16 samples, but the last block (which has 3 samples) is excluded from this number. The MD5 signature is 0xd5b0 5649 75e9 8b8d 8b93 0422 757b 8103, this will be verified at the end of this example.
```

0x98+4 | 1 bit  | 0b1             | Quotient 0
0x98+5 | 11 bit | 0b11101011101   | Remainder 1885
0x9a+0 | 1 bit  | 0b1             | Quotient 0
0x9a+1 | 11 bit | 0b11101110000   | Remainder 1904
0x9b+4 | 1 bit  | 0b1             | Quotient 0
0x9b+5 | 11 bit | 0b10101101111   | Remainder 1391
0x9d+0 | 1 bit  | 0b1             | Quotient 0
0x9d+1 | 11 bit | 0b11000000000   | Remainder 1536
0x9e+4 | 1 bit  | 0b1             | Quotient 0
0x9e+5 | 11 bit | 0b10000010111   | Remainder 1047
0xa0+0 | 1 bit  | 0b1             | Quotient 0
0xa0+1 | 11 bit | 0b10010101110   | Remainder 1198
0xa1+4 | 1 bit  | 0b1             | Quotient 0
0xa1+5 | 11 bit | 0b01100100001   | Remainder 801
0xa3+0 | 13 bit | 0b0000000000001 | Quotient 12
0xa4+5 | 11 bit | 0b11011100111   | Remainder 1767
0xa6+0 | 1 bit  | 0b1             | Quotient 0
0xa6+1 | 11 bit | 0b01001110111   | Remainder 631
0xa7+4 | 1 bit  | 0b1             | Quotient 0
0xa7+5 | 11 bit | 0b01000100100   | Remainder 548
0xa9+0 | 1 bit  | 0b1             | Quotient 0
0xa9+1 | 11 bit | 0b01000010101   | Remainder 533
0xaa+4 | 1 bit  | 0b1             | Quotient 0
0xaa+5 | 11 bit | 0b00100001100   | Remainder 268

> At this point, the decoder should know it is done decoding the coded residual, as it received 16 samples, 1 warm-up sample and 15 residual samples. Each residual sample can be calculated from the quotient and remainder, and then undoing the zig-zag encoding. For example, the value of the first zig-zag encoded residual sample is 3 * 2^11 + 244 = 6388. As this is an even number, the zig-zag encoding is undone by dividing by 2, the residual sample value is 3194. This is done for all residual samples in the next table

Author: ```suggestion
At this point, the decoder should know it is done decoding the coded residual, as it received 16 samples: 1 warm-up sample and 15 residual samples. Each residual sample can be calculated from the quotient and remainder, and undoing the zig-zag encoding. For example, the value of the first zig-zag encoded residual sample is 3 * 2^11 + 244 = 6388. As this is an even number, the zig-zag encoding is undone by dividing by 2, the residual sample value is 3194. This is done for all residual samples in the next table
```

0x44+0 | 4 byte  | 0x20000000         | Vendor string length 32 byte
0x48+0 | 32 byte | (...)              | Vendor string
0x68+0 | 4 byte  | 0x01000000         | Number of fields 1
0x6c+0 | 4 byte  | 0x18000000         | Field length 24 byte
0x70+0 | 24 byte | (...)              | Field contents

> The vendor string is reference libFLAC 1.3.3 20190804, the field contents of the only field is TITLE=Щелкунчик. The vorbis comment field is 24 bytes but only 15 characters in size, because it contains 9 character needing 2 bytes to represent.

Reviewer 2: `TITLE= Матрёшка` would be funnier (sorry, I could not resist ;-)

Author: Not a bad idea actually. I was looking for short words in scripts other than latin that would not be considered offensive in any way, and that was rather hard as I don't speak or read any Russian, Greek, Chinese etc.  Матрёшка is one character less then Щелкунчик so it is probably a better fit, as all those UTF-8 code points still make it look cluttered. Maybe you know something even shorter in Hebrew?

Now I think of it: If I shorten the vendor string, I don't have to change the whole example even with a longer vorbis comment field, so less room for error.

Reviewer 2: Short, well known and all but offensive would be: שלום

Author: Thanks, I'll add that in and force-push this PR branch to amend the last commit.
